Institute of Economic Development
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Question book-new.svg
This article relies on references to primary sources. Please add references to secondary or tertiary sources. (May 2013)
Institute of Economic Development (IED) is a UK representative body for economic development and regeneration professionals.
IED was founded in 1986, largely to represent the interests of local authority economic development officers. It is a non-profit organization run by a Board elected by its membership and a Council that extends to nominees from its branches. Board members are each elected for a three year term. Details of Board members and branch representatives can be found on the IED website.
IED exists to represent the views of its members and the interests of the economic development and regeneration sector more generally. It also sets standards of professional conduct and offers certified education and training as well as continuing professional development.
There are four categories of membership: Student, Associate, Full and Fellow. The criteria for each category are published on the IED website and acceptance of all membership application requires the approval of the Board.
IED's current Chair is Keith Burge, Managing Director of the consultancy firm ERS Ltd and its Vice Chair is Dawn Hudd of Canterbury City Council.
Copies of IED responses to government consultations and other submissions to government are published on the IED website. This also contains other information that may be of interest to those employed in economic development/regeneration or considering a career in the sector. IED also publishes a Directory of Consultants and regular e-bulletins, both of which are freely available.
The Rt Hon the Lord Heseltine CH has become the first Patron of the Institute of Economic Development (IED). On accepting the invitation Lord Heseltine said, “I was pleased to receive the invitation to become the first Patron of IED and I am happy to accept it.  I look forward to offering whatever support I am able to IED’s Chair, the Board and its Executive Director in the important work in which the Institute is engaged.”

The Institute of Economic Development (IED) is the UK’s leading independent professional body representing economic development and regeneration practitioners.

Established over 30 years ago, the IED's key objective is to represent the interests of economic development practitioners and ensure their views are widely expressed and noted. 

The IED is committed to demonstrating the value of economic development work for local and regional communities; the pursuit of best practice in economic development and the attainment of the highest standards of professional conduct and competence.

We are a not for profit company run by a Board of elected Directors and  representatives of local branches make up our National Council. Our branch network provides local access to professional development events and networking opportunities.

For more information about the Institute please phone 01604 874613 or email info@ied.co.uk 

Click to apply online or download an application form

Written correspondence should be addressed to:

The Institute of Economic Development
PO Box 796
NORTHAMPTON
NN4 9TS 

 

Registered Office:

Oakley House, Headway Business Park, 3 Saxon Way West, Corby, Northamptonshire, NN18 9EZ
During the 2013 academic year twenty IED/International Economics Seminars were scheduled. Authors and titles include: Joshua Goodman (Harvard Kennedy School): “First Degree Earns: The Impact of College Quality on College Completion Rates”; Salvatore Nunnari (UC San Diego): “Dynamic Legislative Bargaining with Veto Power”; Gani Aldashev (University of Namur, CRED): “Awareness and AIDS: A Political Economy Perspective” (joint with Jean-Marie Baland); Sheetal Sekhri (University of Virginia): “Prestige Matters: Value of Networks Formed in Colleges”; Dara Lee (University of Missouri): “The Impact of Childhood Health on Adult Educational Attainment: Evidence from Mandatory School Vaccination Laws”; Rajiv Sethi (Barnard): “Perspectives, Opinions, and Information Flows”; Felipe Barrera-Osorio (Harvard University): “Incentivizing schooling for learning: Evidence on the impact of alternative targeting approaches” (by Felipe Barrera-Osorio and Deon Filmer); Raffaella Sadun (Harvard Business School): “Managerial Capital at the Top: Evidence from Indian CEOs”; Tavneet Suri (MIT): “Rural Roads and Intermediated Trade: Regression Discontinuity Evidence from Sierra Leone”; Rema Hanna (Harvard Kennedy School): “THE EFFECT OF POLLUTION ON LABOR SUPPLY: EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT IN MEXICO CITY”; David Weil (Brown University): “Malaria and Early African Development: Evidence from the Sickle Cell Trait,” joint with Emilio Depetris Chauvin (Brown University); Stephen Coate (Cornell): “Evaluating Durable Public Good Provision using Housing Prices”; Eliana La Ferrara (Università Bocconi): “Does interaction affect racial prejudice and cooperation? Evidence from randomly assigned peers in South Africa”; Monika Schnitzer (Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitat Munchen, visiting Harvard): “Spillovers of Venture Capital”; Leigh Linden (University of Texas at Austin): “The Effects of “Girl-Friendly” Schools: Evidence from the BRIGHT School Construction Program in Burkina Faso”; Claudio Ferraz (Pontifica Universidade Catolica do Rio de Janeiro): “Rewarding Violence Control: The Electoral Effects of Pacifying Rio’s Favelas”; Duncan Thomas (Duke): “The Impact of a Natural Disaster on Child Health”; Nishith Prakash (Uconn Storrs): “Cycling to School: Increasing High School Enrollment for Girls in India”; Sandip Sukhtankar (Dartmouth, visiting Harvard): “Fiscal Federalism and Local Politics”; and Miguel Uriquola (Columbia): “College reputation and educational market performance”.

Research Review

Beginning in 1999, the Institute began publishing an annual review of research activities. It includes summaries of discussion papers written during the year as well as highlighting other research efforts of IED research affiliates. This review is mailed to over 1400 development economists world-wide and is also available on the IED website.

Visiting Scholars

The Institute has served as host to visiting scholars from all over the world who want to focus on development economic issues. Recently, Stefan Napel has been collaborating with Dilip Mookherjee on inequality and mobility in a market economy, apart from monograph on the subject. Patrick Legros is collaborating with Andrew Newman on assortative matching. Thomas Gall is also collaborating with Professor Newman and Legros on human capital investment in the presence of matching distortions. Alejandra Traferri is currently working in the field of micro-econometrics, bias correction methods in non-linear models with multiple fixed effects, focusing in ordered profit models. Lastly Fernanda Estevan a 4th year PhD student from Belgium is currently working in the field of microeconomics with a broad interest in education with topics related to public and development economics.

Distinguished Visitors Program

Beginning in 2008 the distinguished visitors program invites distinguished visitors from the different concentrations of economics to give two lectures and one seminar. This exchange of ideas has been a great success allowing the distinguished visitor to disseminate their research to faculty, and students.